docs/src/whats_new.md, before:

# What's new in Version 2.

Signal K server version 2 introduces new REST APIs designed to perform specific operations (e.g. set destination, advance to next point, etc).

Using these APIs will ensure that the underlying Signal K data model has values set in all related paths associated with the operation, providing a cohesive data set that can be reliably used by all connected applications and devices.

These new APIs are mounted under `/signalk/v2/api` and coexist with `/signalk/v1/api` paths, their definition available as OpenApi documents accessible via the server admin user interface.

_**It is important to note that the Signal K data paths maintained by the REST APIs should NOT be updated directly by any other plugin or process. In the case where an API provides an `interface`, it should be used by plugins to perform operations.**_

With the move towards operation based APIs some paths are flagged for deprecation. Please see [Deprecations](#deprecations) section below for details.

---

### Course API

Provides common course operations via `/signalk/v2/api/vessels/self/navigation/course`.

See the [Course API](openapi/course_api.md) for details.

---

### Resources API

Provides operations for creating, maintaining and accessing resources such as routes, waypoints, etc via `/signalk/v2/api/resources`.

See the [Resources API](openapi/resources_api.md) for details.


---

## Notes for Developers:


### NMEA0183 / NMEA2000 message processing

As stated previously the Course API ensures a cohesive data set by ensuring values are set in ALL related Signal K paths for the given operation. 

An NMEA data streams are also a source of course data which, in prior versions, this data has been used to directly populate various Signal K paths (e.g. `n2k-signalk` and `nmea0183-signalk` plugins). 

**These plugins (and others like them) should use the interface provided by the Course API to set / clear a destination.**

In practise this would mean collecting and processing data received from the relevant sentences / pgns to compose a Course API request.


### Connection with v1 Full Data Model

In the current implementation there is still only a single `stream` endpoint and all values emitted as deltas will continue appear there.

_It is important to note though, that `version 2` deltas will not populate the `full data model`. This means that these values will only be available via the API._


### Stream updates

The new APIs emit values in the deltas that are object valued.

For example, when a course is activated deltas will be emitted for `navigation.course.previousPoint`, `navigation.course.nextPoint` and `navigation.course.activeRoute` where the value is an object and not as individual path / values. 

_e.g. `navigation.course.previousPoint`_
```JSON
{
    "path": "navigation.course.previousPoint",
    "value": {
        "position": {
           "latitude": 65.0,
           "longitude": 3.754
        },
        "type": "Location",
        "href": null
    }
}
```

Commit message:

Incorporate additional content . Ensure local images are used. Align styles and layout.

docs/src/whats_new.md, after:

# What's new in Version 2.

Signal K Server version 2 introduces new REST APIs designed to perform specific operations _(e.g. set destination, advance to next point, etc)_.

These APIs have been implemented to ensure the integrity of the underlying Signal K data model by maintaining values in all related paths associated with the operation. In this way a cohesive, reliable data set is presented to all connected applications and devices.

The new APIs are mounted under `/signalk/v2/api`, their definition(s) available as OpenApi documents accessible via _Documentation -> OpenAPI_ in the server admin user interface. They coexist with `/signalk/v1/api` paths to ensure continued operation of applications.

Some REST APIs provide an `interface` for use by plugins to enact operations in a managed way.

_**Important: The Signal K data paths maintained by the REST APIs should NOT be updated directly by any other plugin or process!**_

With the move towards operation based APIs some paths are flagged for deprecation. Please see [Changes & Deprecations](./breaking_changes.md) for details.

---

### Course API

Provides common course operations via `/signalk/v2/api/vessels/self/navigation/course`.

See the [Course API](./develop/rest-api/course_api.md) for details.

---

### Resources API

Provides operations for creating, maintaining and accessing resources such as routes, waypoints, etc via `/signalk/v2/api/resources`.

See the [Resources API](./develop/rest-api/resources_api.md) for details.


---

## Notes for Developers:


### NMEA0183 / NMEA2000 message processing

The Course API and associated operations maintain all "course" related paths in the data model but this API is not the only source of course data. NMEA data streams are also a source of course data.

In the past, plugins processing this data have directly populated various `v1` Signal K paths. Moving forward 
these plugins should utilise interface provided by the Course API to perform the required operation.

In practise this would mean collecting and processing data received from the relevant sentences / PGNs to compose a Course API request.


### Connection with v1 Full Data Model

In the current implementation of Signal K Server there is still only a single `stream` endpoint and all values emitted as deltas _(both `v1` & `v2`)_ will continue appear there.

It should be noted, that while both `v1` & `v2` deltas appear in the one stream, only `v1` deltas will populate the _full data model_ and be available under the `/signalk/v1/api/` path!

### Stream updates

The new REST APIs emit `v2` deltas with values that are objects.

For example, when a course is activated, deltas will be emitted for `navigation.course.previousPoint`, `navigation.course.nextPoint` and `navigation.course.activeRoute` where the value is an object.

_Example: v2 Delta_
```JSON
{
    "path": "navigation.course.previousPoint",
    "value": {
        "position": {
           "latitude": 65.0,
           "longitude": 3.754
        },
        "type": "Location",
        "href": null
    }
}
```
