docs/develop/plugins/custom_renderers.md, before:

---
title: Custom Renderers for the Data Browser
---

# Custom Renderers

Signalk's Data Browser provides an easily navigated snapshot of the state of your Signalk system. Some paths like `navigation.gnss.satellitesInView` however are data intensive and difficult to make much sense out of in raw JSON form.

As of Signalk V 2.17.0, you'll notice that the path appears in the Data Browser as an easy to understand graphic:

<img width="751" height="236" alt="Screenshot 2025-12-15 at 1 56 08 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2514d3f7-9b6a-4f50-a6cf-d5e8868199a4" />

This is a Custom Renderer. The code for it is embedded in the DataBrowser package. See: [ValueRenderer.js](https://github.com/SignalK/signalk-server/blob/master/packages/server-admin-ui/src/views/DataBrowser/ValueRenderers.js).

As of Signalk V 2.19.0, there are additional embedded Custom Renderers for Notifications, Attitude, Direction, Meters and Large Arrays.

Also as V 2.19.0, developers can create their own renderers and associate them with the path for display in the Data Browser or in any React App.

You can add renderers for existing paths, override existing hard-coded renderers, and create novel renderers for any novel paths that your plugin creates.

## Creating a Custom Renderer

A Custom Renderer is any React Component that takes `value`, at a minimum, as an argument and renders that value in HTML.

Say, for example, you wanted to display a value in bold. You'd create a simple BoldRenderer that would look something like:

```
const BoldRenderer = ({ value }) => {
  return <div className="text-primary"><b>value</b></div>;
}
```

There are more interesting examples in the ValueRenderer.js file.

## Making Your Renderer Available at Runtime

- Create a plugin
- Add your Component in a separate file (usually under [plugin dir]/src/component)
- Add webpack includes and scripts to your package.json
- Add keyword "signalk-node-server-addon" to your package.json
- Create a webpack.config.js (see any Plugin with their own configuration component) file that exports the renderer:

```
 plugins: [
    new ModuleFederationPlugin({
      name: "Sample renderer",
      library: { type: "var", name: packageJson.name.replace(/[-@/]/g, "_") },
      filename: "remoteEntry.js",
      exposes: {
        "SampleRenderer": "./src/components/SampleRenderer",
      },
      shared: [{ react: { singleton: false, strictVersion: true } }],
    }),
...
```

- Build your plugin (`npm run build`)

## Use Your Renderer

To use the renderer, users need to assign the `renderer` property to the path's meta.

Example (for a renderer in a federated module):

```
    "context": "vessels.self",
    "updates": [
      {
        "meta": [
          {
            "path": "sample.value",
            "value": {
              "renderer": {
                "module": "renderer-plugin",
                "name": "SampleRenderer",
                "options": {
                  "option-1": "optional-value-1"
                }
              },
...
```

Commit message:

feat: add React 19 Admin UI with runtime switching (#2267)
feat(admin-ui): add React 19 Admin UI with runtime switching

Add a new React 19 Admin UI package (server-admin-ui-react19) alongside
the legacy React 16 Admin UI. Users can switch between them at runtime
using the SIGNALK_ADMIN_UI=react19 environment variable. The legacy UI
remains the default.

Core migration:
- React 16 → React 19.2 with React Compiler 1.0 for automatic memoization
- React Router v4 → v6 (Switch→Routes, component→element)
- Redux → Zustand for lightweight state management (~3KB)
- Bootstrap 4 → Bootstrap 5 class names
- ReactDOM.render → createRoot API
- String refs → React.createRef()
- Module Federation with singleton React for plugin compatibility

Performance and React 19 features:
- React Compiler eliminates manual memo() wrappers
- useDeferredValue for non-blocking search filtering
- Virtualized DataBrowser and Meta tables for large datasets
- Stacked card layout on narrow screens for mobile support

Developer experience:
- TypeScript strict mode with full type coverage
- 12 components converted from JS to TSX with hooks
- ESLint plugins for React 19 compliance (react-hooks, react-compiler)
- noUnusedLocals/noUnusedParameters enabled in tsconfig
- Vitest test suite (86 tests for Zustand store)
- SCSS modernized (color.adjust, math.div, module system)

Reliability:
- Error boundaries for incompatible webapps and plugins
- React 19 incompatibility detection with user-friendly messages


BREAKING CHANGE: Embedded webapps and custom renderers built with
React 16 must be updated and rebuilt to work with React 19.

docs/develop/plugins/custom_renderers.md, after:

---
title: Custom Renderers for the Data Browser
---

# Custom Renderers

Signalk's Data Browser provides an easily navigated snapshot of the state of your Signalk system. Some paths like `navigation.gnss.satellitesInView` however are data intensive and difficult to make much sense out of in raw JSON form.

As of Signalk V 2.17.0, you'll notice that the path appears in the Data Browser as an easy to understand graphic:

<img width="751" height="236" alt="Screenshot 2025-12-15 at 1 56 08 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2514d3f7-9b6a-4f50-a6cf-d5e8868199a4" />

This is a Custom Renderer. The code for it is embedded in the DataBrowser package. See: [ValueRenderers.tsx](https://github.com/SignalK/signalk-server/blob/master/packages/server-admin-ui-react19/src/views/DataBrowser/ValueRenderers.tsx).

As of Signalk V 2.19.0, there are additional embedded Custom Renderers for Notifications, Attitude, Direction, Meters and Large Arrays.

Also as V 2.19.0, developers can create their own renderers and associate them with the path for display in the Data Browser or in any React App.

You can add renderers for existing paths, override existing hard-coded renderers, and create novel renderers for any novel paths that your plugin creates.

## Creating a Custom Renderer

A Custom Renderer is any React Component that takes `value`, at a minimum, as an argument and renders that value in HTML.

Say, for example, you wanted to display a value in bold. You'd create a simple BoldRenderer that would look something like:

```
const BoldRenderer = ({ value }) => {
  return <div className="text-primary"><b>value</b></div>;
}
```

There are more interesting examples in the ValueRenderers.tsx file.

## Making Your Renderer Available at Runtime

- Create a plugin
- Add your Component in a separate file (usually under [plugin dir]/src/component)
- Add build tool includes and scripts to your package.json (Webpack or Vite)
- Add keyword "signalk-node-server-addon" to your package.json
- Configure Module Federation to export the renderer. Example using Webpack:

```javascript
plugins: [
  new ModuleFederationPlugin({
    name: "Sample renderer",
    library: { type: "var", name: packageJson.name.replace(/[-@/]/g, "_") },
    filename: "remoteEntry.js",
    exposes: {
      "./SampleRenderer": "./src/components/SampleRenderer",
    },
    shared: {
      react: { singleton: true, requiredVersion: false },
      "react-dom": { singleton: true, requiredVersion: false }
    },
  }),
  ...
]
```

**Important:** Configure React as a singleton with `requiredVersion: false` to share the host's React 19 instance. See [vite.config.js](https://github.com/SignalK/signalk-server/blob/master/packages/server-admin-ui-react19/vite.config.js) for the Admin UI's configuration.

- Build your plugin (`npm run build`)

## Use Your Renderer

To use the renderer, users need to assign the `renderer` property to the path's meta.

Example (for a renderer in a federated module):

```
    "context": "vessels.self",
    "updates": [
      {
        "meta": [
          {
            "path": "sample.value",
            "value": {
              "renderer": {
                "module": "renderer-plugin",
                "name": "SampleRenderer",
                "options": {
                  "option-1": "optional-value-1"
                }
              },
...
```
