docs/develop/plugins/deltas.md, before:

---
title: Processing Data
---

# Processing data from the server

A plugin will generally want to:

1. Subscribe to data published by the server _(i.e. received from a NMEA 2000 bus, etc)_
1. Emit data.

In both cases the plugin will use _deltas_ which the server uses to signal changes in the Signal K full data model. Delta messages contain the new value associated with a path (not the amount of change from the previous value.)\_

_See the [Signal K Delta Specification](http://signalk.org/specification/1.7.0/doc/data_model.html#delta-format) for details._

Using the server API, plugins can either:

1. Get the current value of a path in the full model or
1. Subscribe to a path and access a stream of _deltas_ that updates every time the value is updated.

By specifying a context _e.g. 'vessels.self'_ you can limit the number of delta messages received to those of host vesseel.
To receive all deltas you can specify `*` as the context.

You can also limit the deltas received by the path you supply.
If you supply a specific path _e.g. navigation.position_, only updates in the value will be received.
Since paths are hierarchical, paths can contain wildcards _e.g.\_navigation.\*_ which will deliver deltas containing updates to all paths under `navigation`.

The data received is formatted as per the following example:

```javascript
  {
    path: 'navigation.position',
    value: { longitude: 24.7366117, latitude: 59.72493 },
    context: 'vessel.self',
    source: {
        label: 'n2k-sample-data',
        type: 'NMEA2000',
        pgn: 129039,
        src: '43'
    },
    $source: 'n2k-sample-data.43',
    timestamp: '2014-08-15T19:00:02.392Z'
  }
```

## Reading the current path value

The server API provides the following methods for retrieving values from the full data model.

- `getSelfPath(path)` returns the value of the supplied `path` in the `vessels.self` context.

```javascript
const value = app.getSelfPath('uuid')
app.debug(value) // Should output something like urn:mrn:signalk:uuid:a9d2c3b1-611b-4b00-8628-0b89d014ed60
```

- `getPath(path)` returns the value of the path (including the context) starting from the _root_ of the full data model.

```javascript
const baseStations = app.getPath('shore.basestations')
```

## Subscribing to Deltas

A can subscribe to a stream of updates (deltas) by creating the subscription.

Subcriptions are generally manged in the plugin `start()` and `stop()` methods to ensure the subscribtions are _unsubscribed_ prior to the plugin stopping to ensure all resources are freed.

The following example illustrates the pattern using the {@link @signalk/server-api!ServerAPI.subscriptionmanager | `subscriptionmanager`} API method.

```javascript
let unsubscribes = []

plugin.start = (options, restartPlugin) => {
  app.debug('Plugin started')
  let localSubscription = {
    context: '*', // Get data for all contexts
    subscribe: [
      {
        path: '*', // Get all paths
        period: 5000 // Every 5000ms
      }
    ]
  }

  app.subscriptionmanager.subscribe(
    localSubscription,
    unsubscribes,
    (subscriptionError) => {
      app.error('Error:' + subscriptionError)
    },
    (delta) => {
      delta.updates.forEach((u) => {
        app.debug(u)
      })
    }
  )
}

plugin.stop = () => {
  unsubscribes.forEach((f) => f())
  unsubscribes = []
}
```

In the `start()` method create a subscription definition `localSubscription` which is then passed to `app.subscriptionmanager.subscribe()` as the first argument, we also pass the `unsubscribes` array in the second argument.

The third argument is a function that will be called when there's an error.

The final argument is a function that will be called every time an update is received.

In the `stop()` method each subcription in the `unsubscribes` array is _unsubscribed_ and the resources released.

### Path Discovery with `announceNewPaths`

When using granular subscriptions (subscribing to specific paths rather than `*`), you may want to discover what paths are available without receiving continuous updates for all of them. The `announceNewPaths` option solves this:

```javascript
let localSubscription = {
  context: '*',
  announceNewPaths: true, // Announce all matching paths once
  subscribe: [
    {
      path: 'navigation.position', // Only get continuous updates for this path
      period: 1000
    }
  ]
}
```

When `announceNewPaths: true` is set:

1. **On subscribe**: The server sends cached values for ALL existing paths matching the context filter (once each)
2. **On new path**: When a new path appears later (e.g., a new sensor comes online), the server announces it once
3. **Continuous updates**: Only the explicitly subscribed paths receive continuous updates

This is useful for:

- **Data browsers** that need to show all available paths but only update visible ones
- **Discovery tools** that want to know what data is available
- **Dashboards** that let users select which data to display

The announced deltas are regular delta messages - there's no special flag. Your client should track which paths it has seen and can then subscribe to specific ones as needed.

## Sending Deltas

A SignalK plugin can not only read deltas, but can also send them. This is done using the `handleMessage()` API method and supplying:

1. The plugin id
2. A formatted delta update message
3. The Signal K version ['v1' or 'v2'] _(if omitted the default is 'v1')_. See [REST APIs](../rest-api/README.md) for details.

_Example:_

```javascript
app.handleMessage(
  plugin.id,
  {
    updates: [
      {
        values: [
          {
            path: 'environment.outside.temperature',
            value: -253
          }
        ]
      }
    ]
  },
  'v1'
)
```

## Sending NMEA 2000 data from a plugin

A SignalK plugin can not only emit deltas, but can also send data such as NMEA 2000 data.

This is done using the `emit()` API and specifying the provider as well as the formatted data to send.

_Example: Send NMEA using Actisense serial format:_

```javascript
app.emit(
  'nmea2000out',
  '2017-04-15T14:57:58.468Z,0,262384,0,0,14,01,0e,00,88,b6,02,00,00,00,00,00,a2,08,00'
)
```

_Example: Send NMEA using Canboat JSON format:_

```javascript
app.emit('nmea2000JsonOut', {
  pgn: 130306,
  'Wind Speed': speed,
  'Wind Angle': angle < 0 ? angle + Math.PI * 2 : angle,
  Reference: 'Apparent'
})
```

### Sending a message on NMEA2000 startup

If you need to send an NMEA2000 message out at startup, _e.g get current state from a device_ you will need to wait until the provider is ready before sending your message.

_Example: Send NMEA after the provider is ready:_

```javascript
app.on('nmea2000OutAvailable', () => {
  app.emit(
    'nmea2000out',
    '2017-04-15T14:57:58.468Z,2,6,126720,%s,%s,4,a3,99,01,00'
  )
})
```

Commit message:

docs: add source priority guide, N2K device management, and developer docs
Add comprehensive documentation for new features:
- Source Priority guide: source ranking, path-level overrides, priority
  resolution, REST API endpoints
- N2K Device Management: device discovery, CAN Name identification,
  instance editing (device/data/battery/DC), installation descriptions,
  instance conflict detection and resolution
- Developer docs: sourcePolicy subscription parameter for plugins and
  WebSocket clients
- Breaking changes: CAN Name source identification, all-source data
  preservation
- Configuration: document Data menu pages

docs/develop/plugins/deltas.md, after:

---
title: Processing Data
---

# Processing data from the server

A plugin will generally want to:

1. Subscribe to data published by the server _(i.e. received from a NMEA 2000 bus, etc)_
1. Emit data.

In both cases the plugin will use _deltas_ which the server uses to signal changes in the Signal K full data model. Delta messages contain the new value associated with a path (not the amount of change from the previous value.)\_

_See the [Signal K Delta Specification](http://signalk.org/specification/1.7.0/doc/data_model.html#delta-format) for details._

Using the server API, plugins can either:

1. Get the current value of a path in the full model or
1. Subscribe to a path and access a stream of _deltas_ that updates every time the value is updated.

By specifying a context _e.g. 'vessels.self'_ you can limit the number of delta messages received to those of host vesseel.
To receive all deltas you can specify `*` as the context.

You can also limit the deltas received by the path you supply.
If you supply a specific path _e.g. navigation.position_, only updates in the value will be received.
Since paths are hierarchical, paths can contain wildcards _e.g.\_navigation.\*_ which will deliver deltas containing updates to all paths under `navigation`.

The data received is formatted as per the following example:

```javascript
  {
    path: 'navigation.position',
    value: { longitude: 24.7366117, latitude: 59.72493 },
    context: 'vessel.self',
    source: {
        label: 'n2k-sample-data',
        type: 'NMEA2000',
        pgn: 129039,
        src: '43'
    },
    $source: 'n2k-sample-data.43',
    timestamp: '2014-08-15T19:00:02.392Z'
  }
```

## Reading the current path value

The server API provides the following methods for retrieving values from the full data model.

- `getSelfPath(path)` returns the value of the supplied `path` in the `vessels.self` context.

```javascript
const value = app.getSelfPath('uuid')
app.debug(value) // Should output something like urn:mrn:signalk:uuid:a9d2c3b1-611b-4b00-8628-0b89d014ed60
```

- `getPath(path)` returns the value of the path (including the context) starting from the _root_ of the full data model.

```javascript
const baseStations = app.getPath('shore.basestations')
```

## Subscribing to Deltas

A can subscribe to a stream of updates (deltas) by creating the subscription.

Subcriptions are generally manged in the plugin `start()` and `stop()` methods to ensure the subscribtions are _unsubscribed_ prior to the plugin stopping to ensure all resources are freed.

The following example illustrates the pattern using the {@link @signalk/server-api!ServerAPI.subscriptionmanager | `subscriptionmanager`} API method.

```javascript
let unsubscribes = []

plugin.start = (options, restartPlugin) => {
  app.debug('Plugin started')
  let localSubscription = {
    context: '*', // Get data for all contexts
    subscribe: [
      {
        path: '*', // Get all paths
        period: 5000 // Every 5000ms
      }
    ]
  }

  app.subscriptionmanager.subscribe(
    localSubscription,
    unsubscribes,
    (subscriptionError) => {
      app.error('Error:' + subscriptionError)
    },
    (delta) => {
      delta.updates.forEach((u) => {
        app.debug(u)
      })
    }
  )
}

plugin.stop = () => {
  unsubscribes.forEach((f) => f())
  unsubscribes = []
}
```

In the `start()` method create a subscription definition `localSubscription` which is then passed to `app.subscriptionmanager.subscribe()` as the first argument, we also pass the `unsubscribes` array in the second argument.

The third argument is a function that will be called when there's an error.

The final argument is a function that will be called every time an update is received.

In the `stop()` method each subcription in the `unsubscribes` array is _unsubscribed_ and the resources released.

### Path Discovery with `announceNewPaths`

When using granular subscriptions (subscribing to specific paths rather than `*`), you may want to discover what paths are available without receiving continuous updates for all of them. The `announceNewPaths` option solves this:

```javascript
let localSubscription = {
  context: '*',
  announceNewPaths: true, // Announce all matching paths once
  subscribe: [
    {
      path: 'navigation.position', // Only get continuous updates for this path
      period: 1000
    }
  ]
}
```

When `announceNewPaths: true` is set:

1. **On subscribe**: The server sends cached values for ALL existing paths matching the context filter (once each)
2. **On new path**: When a new path appears later (e.g., a new sensor comes online), the server announces it once
3. **Continuous updates**: Only the explicitly subscribed paths receive continuous updates

This is useful for:

- **Data browsers** that need to show all available paths but only update visible ones
- **Discovery tools** that want to know what data is available
- **Dashboards** that let users select which data to display

The announced deltas are regular delta messages - there's no special flag. Your client should track which paths it has seen and can then subscribe to specific ones as needed.

### Source Policy: `sourcePolicy`

When the server has [Source Priority](../../setup/source-priority.md) configured, subscriptions receive only the preferred source's data by default. You can override this with the `sourcePolicy` option:

```javascript
let localSubscription = {
  context: '*',
  sourcePolicy: 'all', // Receive data from ALL sources, not just preferred
  subscribe: [
    {
      path: 'navigation.position',
      period: 1000
    }
  ]
}
```

| Value         | Behaviour                                                            |
| ------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `'preferred'` | Only deliver values from the preferred source (default)              |
| `'all'`       | Deliver values from all sources regardless of priority configuration |

Use `sourcePolicy: 'all'` when your plugin needs to see data from every source — for example, a display that compares readings from multiple sensors, or a data logger that records all sources.

WebSocket clients can also set this via the connection URL query parameter: `?sourcePolicy=all` or `?sourcePolicy=preferred`.

## Sending Deltas

A SignalK plugin can not only read deltas, but can also send them. This is done using the `handleMessage()` API method and supplying:

1. The plugin id
2. A formatted delta update message
3. The Signal K version ['v1' or 'v2'] _(if omitted the default is 'v1')_. See [REST APIs](../rest-api/README.md) for details.

_Example:_

```javascript
app.handleMessage(
  plugin.id,
  {
    updates: [
      {
        values: [
          {
            path: 'environment.outside.temperature',
            value: -253
          }
        ]
      }
    ]
  },
  'v1'
)
```

## Sending NMEA 2000 data from a plugin

A SignalK plugin can not only emit deltas, but can also send data such as NMEA 2000 data.

This is done using the `emit()` API and specifying the provider as well as the formatted data to send.

_Example: Send NMEA using Actisense serial format:_

```javascript
app.emit(
  'nmea2000out',
  '2017-04-15T14:57:58.468Z,0,262384,0,0,14,01,0e,00,88,b6,02,00,00,00,00,00,a2,08,00'
)
```

_Example: Send NMEA using Canboat JSON format:_

```javascript
app.emit('nmea2000JsonOut', {
  pgn: 130306,
  'Wind Speed': speed,
  'Wind Angle': angle < 0 ? angle + Math.PI * 2 : angle,
  Reference: 'Apparent'
})
```

### Sending a message on NMEA2000 startup

If you need to send an NMEA2000 message out at startup, _e.g get current state from a device_ you will need to wait until the provider is ready before sending your message.

_Example: Send NMEA after the provider is ready:_

```javascript
app.on('nmea2000OutAvailable', () => {
  app.emit(
    'nmea2000out',
    '2017-04-15T14:57:58.468Z,2,6,126720,%s,%s,4,a3,99,01,00'
  )
})
```
