docs/develop/plugins/publishing.md, before:

---
title: Publishing to The AppStore
---

# Publishing to The AppStore

Plugins and WebApps are available in the AppStore when they have been published to [npm repository](https://www.npmjs.com/) with the one or more of the following keywords in the `package.json` file:

- `signalk-node-server-plugin`
- `signalk-webapp`

Additionally you can have your plugin appear within one or more AppStore categories by also adding the following keyword(s):

- `signalk-category-chart-plotters`
- `signalk-category-nmea-2000`
- `signalk-category-nmea-0183`
- `signalk-category-instruments`
- `signalk-category-hardware`
- `signalk-category-ais`
- `signalk-category-notifications`
- `signalk-category-digital-switching`
- `signalk-category-utility`
- `signalk-category-cloud`
- `signalk-category-weather`
- `signalk-category-deprecated`
- `signalk-category-hidden` (won't show on the App Store)

To have your plugin start automatically after being installed, without requiring any configuration via the **Plugin Config** screen add the following key to the `package.json` file:

```JSON
"signalk-plugin-enabled-by-default": true
```

To control the way your WebApp is displayed in the Admin UI add a `signalk` key with the following attributes:

```JSON
  "signalk": {
    "appIcon": "./img/icon-72x72.png", // path to an image file to use as an icon.
    "displayName": "My SK App" // name to display in place of the package name.
  }
```

_Example: package.json_

```JSON
{
  "name": "my-signalk-plugin-app",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "My great signalk plugin-app",
  "keywords": [
    "signalk-node-server-plugin",
    "signalk-webapp",
    "signalk-category-ais"
  ],
  "signalk-plugin-enabled-by-default": true,
  "signalk": {
    "appIcon": "./assets/icons/icon-72x72.png",
    "displayName": "My Great WebApp"
  },
  "main": "plugin/index.js",
  "scripts": {
    "test": "echo \"Error: no test specified\" && exit 1"
  },
  "author": "",
  "license": "ISC"
}
```

#### Publishing your Plugin

Once you have developed and tested your Plugin / WebApp you can publish it to make it visible in the AppStore.
To do this, in a terminal session from within the folder containing `package.json`:

```shell
npm publish
```

Commit message:

feat: use --ignore-scripts for AppStore plugin installs
Install plugins with npm's --ignore-scripts flag to improve security
by preventing arbitrary code execution during installation.

Plugin developers should use prepublishOnly instead of postinstall
scripts to ensure their packages work correctly when installed via
the AppStore.

docs/develop/plugins/publishing.md, after:

---
title: Publishing to The AppStore
---

# Publishing to The AppStore

Plugins and WebApps are available in the AppStore when they have been published to [npm repository](https://www.npmjs.com/) with the one or more of the following keywords in the `package.json` file:

- `signalk-node-server-plugin`
- `signalk-webapp`

Additionally you can have your plugin appear within one or more AppStore categories by also adding the following keyword(s):

- `signalk-category-chart-plotters`
- `signalk-category-nmea-2000`
- `signalk-category-nmea-0183`
- `signalk-category-instruments`
- `signalk-category-hardware`
- `signalk-category-ais`
- `signalk-category-notifications`
- `signalk-category-digital-switching`
- `signalk-category-utility`
- `signalk-category-cloud`
- `signalk-category-weather`
- `signalk-category-deprecated`
- `signalk-category-hidden` (won't show on the App Store)

To have your plugin start automatically after being installed, without requiring any configuration via the **Plugin Config** screen add the following key to the `package.json` file:

```JSON
"signalk-plugin-enabled-by-default": true
```

To control the way your WebApp is displayed in the Admin UI add a `signalk` key with the following attributes:

```JSON
  "signalk": {
    "appIcon": "./img/icon-72x72.png", // path to an image file to use as an icon.
    "displayName": "My SK App" // name to display in place of the package name.
  }
```

_Example: package.json_

```JSON
{
  "name": "my-signalk-plugin-app",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "My great signalk plugin-app",
  "keywords": [
    "signalk-node-server-plugin",
    "signalk-webapp",
    "signalk-category-ais"
  ],
  "signalk-plugin-enabled-by-default": true,
  "signalk": {
    "appIcon": "./assets/icons/icon-72x72.png",
    "displayName": "My Great WebApp"
  },
  "main": "plugin/index.js",
  "scripts": {
    "test": "echo \"Error: no test specified\" && exit 1"
  },
  "author": "",
  "license": "ISC"
}
```

### Important: Avoid install-time scripts

The Signal K AppStore installs plugins using `npm install --ignore-scripts` for security reasons. This means any `preinstall`, `install`, or `postinstall` scripts in your plugin's `package.json` will not run when users install your plugin through the AppStore.

Ensure your npm package is ready to use without requiring install-time scripts. If you need build steps, use `prepublishOnly` instead - this runs before publishing to npm, so your package already contains everything it needs.

#### Publishing your Plugin

Once you have developed and tested your Plugin / WebApp you can publish it to make it visible in the AppStore.
To do this, in a terminal session from within the folder containing `package.json`:

```shell
npm publish
```
