docs/develop/plugins/wasm/README.md, before:

---
title: WASM Plugins
children:
  - assemblyscript.md
  - rust.md
  - go.md
  - http_endpoints.md
  - deltas.md
  - capabilities.md
  - best_practices.md
  - integration_guide.md
---

# WASM Plugin Development Guide

## Overview

This guide covers how to develop WASM/WASIX plugins for Signal K Server 3.0. WASM plugins run in a secure sandbox with isolated storage and capability-based permissions.

## What Makes a WASM Plugin?

A WASM plugin is an npm package that contains the WASM code for the plugin instead of the traditional JavaScript code. A WASM plugin is identified by the `signalk-wasm-plugin` keyword in package.json and the **`wasmManifest`** field in `package.json`:

```json
{
  "name": "my-plugin-name",
  "wasmManifest": "plugin.wasm",
  "wasmCapabilities": { ... }
}
```

**Key points:**

- **`wasmManifest`** (required): Path to the compiled `.wasm` file. This field tells Signal K to load this as a WASM plugin instead of a Node.js plugin.
- **`wasmCapabilities`** (required): Declares what permissions the plugin needs (network, storage, etc.)
- **Package name** (flexible): Can be anything - `my-plugin`, `@myorg/my-plugin`, etc. There is **no requirement** to use `@signalk/` scope.
- **Keywords**: Include `signalk-wasm-plugin` for discovery (do **not** use `signalk-node-server-plugin` - that's for Node.js plugins only)

## Language Options

Signal K Server supports multiple languages for WASM plugin development:

- **AssemblyScript** - TypeScript-like syntax, easiest for JS/TS developers, smallest binaries (3-10 KB)
- **Rust** - Best performance and tooling, medium binaries (50-200 KB)
- **Go/TinyGo** - Go via TinyGo compiler, medium binaries (50-150 KB)

## Why WASM Plugins?

### Benefits

- **Security**: Sandboxed execution with no access to host system
- **Hot-reload**: Update plugins without server restart
- **Multi-language**: Write plugins in Rust, AssemblyScript, and more
- **Crash isolation**: Plugin crashes don't affect server
- **Performance**: Near-native performance with WASM
- **Self contained**: WASM plugins do not install any additional dependencies
- **Small binaries (compared to native options)**: 3-200 KB depending on language

### Current Capabilities

- **Delta Emission**: Send SignalK deltas to update vessel data
- **Status & Error Reporting**: Set plugin status and error messages
- **Configuration**: The same JSON schema-based configuration as JS plugins
- **Data Storage**: VFS-isolated file storage
- **HTTP Endpoints**: Register custom REST API endpoints
- **Static Files**: Serve web UI from `public/` directory
- **Network Access**: HTTP requests via as-fetch (AssemblyScript)
- **Resource Providers**: Serve SignalK resources
- **Weather Providers**: Integrate with Signal K Weather API
- **Radar Providers**: Integrate with Signal K Radar API

## Choose Your Language

### AssemblyScript - Recommended for JS/TS Developers

**Best for:**

- Quick prototypes
- Simple data processing
- Migrating existing Node.js plugins
- Developers familiar with TypeScript

**Pros:**

- TypeScript-like syntax
- Fast development
- Smallest binaries (3-10 KB)
- Familiar tooling (npm)

**Cons:**

- Smaller ecosystem than Rust
- Some TypeScript features unavailable
- Manual memory management

**[Jump to AssemblyScript Guide](./assemblyscript.md)**

### Rust - Recommended for Performance-Critical Plugins

**Best for:**

- Performance-critical plugins
- Complex algorithms
- Low-level operations
- Production plugins

**Pros:**

- Best performance
- Memory safety
- Rich ecosystem
- Strong typing

**Cons:**

- Steeper learning curve
- Longer compile times
- Larger binaries (50-200 KB)

**[Jump to Rust Guide](./rust.md)**

### Go/TinyGo - For Go Developers

**Best for:**

- Go developers wanting to write plugins
- Medium complexity plugins
- Resource providers with hybrid patterns

**Pros:**

- Familiar Go syntax
- Good standard library support
- Medium binaries (50-150 KB)
- Strong typing

**Cons:**

- Requires TinyGo (not standard Go)
- Some Go features unavailable
- Slower than Rust

**[Jump to Go/TinyGo Guide](./go.md)**

Commit message:

feat: add serverEvents capability for WASM plugins
Add support for WASM plugins to receive server events and emit custom
plugin events. This enables plugins to react to server state changes
like statistics updates, vessel info changes, and provider status.

Changes:
- New WasmEventManager class handling event subscriptions and delivery
- FFI functions: sk_subscribe_events, sk_emit_event, sk_get_allowed_event_types
- Whitelist filtering for safe event types (no functions/callbacks)
- Plugins emit events with PLUGIN_ prefix (from field set automatically)
- Event buffering during hot-reload to prevent message loss

New example plugin:
- example-event-handler-rust demonstrating event subscription and emission
- Monitors SERVERSTATISTICS for high delta rates
- Emits PLUGIN_HIGH_DELTA_RATE alerts when threshold exceeded

Also includes:
- TypeScript type improvements in weather-provider.ts and plugin-routes.ts
- Documentation for serverEvents capability
- Removed unused code and eslint fixes

docs/develop/plugins/wasm/README.md, after:

---
title: WASM Plugins
children:
  - assemblyscript.md
  - rust.md
  - go.md
  - http_endpoints.md
  - deltas.md
  - capabilities.md
  - best_practices.md
  - integration_guide.md
---

# WASM Plugin Development Guide

## Overview

This guide covers how to develop WASM/WASIX plugins for Signal K Server 3.0. WASM plugins run in a secure sandbox with isolated storage and capability-based permissions.

## What Makes a WASM Plugin?

A WASM plugin is an npm package that contains the WASM code for the plugin instead of the traditional JavaScript code. A WASM plugin is identified by the `signalk-wasm-plugin` keyword in package.json and the **`wasmManifest`** field in `package.json`:

```json
{
  "name": "my-plugin-name",
  "wasmManifest": "plugin.wasm",
  "wasmCapabilities": { ... }
}
```

**Key points:**

- **`wasmManifest`** (required): Path to the compiled `.wasm` file. This field tells Signal K to load this as a WASM plugin instead of a Node.js plugin.
- **`wasmCapabilities`** (required): Declares what permissions the plugin needs (network, storage, etc.)
- **Package name** (flexible): Can be anything - `my-plugin`, `@myorg/my-plugin`, etc. There is **no requirement** to use `@signalk/` scope.
- **Keywords**: Include `signalk-wasm-plugin` for discovery (do **not** use `signalk-node-server-plugin` - that's for Node.js plugins only)

## Language Options

Signal K Server supports multiple languages for WASM plugin development:

- **AssemblyScript** - TypeScript-like syntax, easiest for JS/TS developers, smallest binaries (3-10 KB)
- **Rust** - Best performance and tooling, medium binaries (50-200 KB)
- **Go/TinyGo** - Go via TinyGo compiler, medium binaries (50-150 KB)

## Why WASM Plugins?

### Benefits

- **Security**: Sandboxed execution with no access to host system
- **Hot-reload**: Update plugins without server restart
- **Multi-language**: Write plugins in Rust, AssemblyScript, and more
- **Crash isolation**: Plugin crashes don't affect server
- **Performance**: Near-native performance with WASM
- **Self contained**: WASM plugins do not install any additional dependencies
- **Small binaries (compared to native options)**: 3-200 KB depending on language

### Current Capabilities

- **Delta Emission**: Send SignalK deltas to update vessel data
- **Status & Error Reporting**: Set plugin status and error messages
- **Configuration**: The same JSON schema-based configuration as JS plugins
- **Data Storage**: VFS-isolated file storage
- **HTTP Endpoints**: Register custom REST API endpoints
- **Static Files**: Serve web UI from `public/` directory
- **Network Access**: HTTP requests via as-fetch (AssemblyScript)
- **Resource Providers**: Serve SignalK resources
- **Weather Providers**: Integrate with Signal K Weather API
- **Radar Providers**: Integrate with Signal K Radar API
- **Server Events**: Receive and emit server events for monitoring and inter-plugin communication

## Choose Your Language

### AssemblyScript - Recommended for JS/TS Developers

**Best for:**

- Quick prototypes
- Simple data processing
- Migrating existing Node.js plugins
- Developers familiar with TypeScript

**Pros:**

- TypeScript-like syntax
- Fast development
- Smallest binaries (3-10 KB)
- Familiar tooling (npm)

**Cons:**

- Smaller ecosystem than Rust
- Some TypeScript features unavailable
- Manual memory management

**[Jump to AssemblyScript Guide](./assemblyscript.md)**

### Rust - Recommended for Performance-Critical Plugins

**Best for:**

- Performance-critical plugins
- Complex algorithms
- Low-level operations
- Production plugins

**Pros:**

- Best performance
- Memory safety
- Rich ecosystem
- Strong typing

**Cons:**

- Steeper learning curve
- Longer compile times
- Larger binaries (50-200 KB)

**[Jump to Rust Guide](./rust.md)**

### Go/TinyGo - For Go Developers

**Best for:**

- Go developers wanting to write plugins
- Medium complexity plugins
- Resource providers with hybrid patterns

**Pros:**

- Familiar Go syntax
- Good standard library support
- Medium binaries (50-150 KB)
- Strong typing

**Cons:**

- Requires TinyGo (not standard Go)
- Some Go features unavailable
- Slower than Rust

**[Jump to Go/TinyGo Guide](./go.md)**
